Add Ballerina VSCode debugger documentation (#20)
wso2/docs-ballerina-visual-studio-code-plugin: en/docs/debugging/debug.md

# Debug Ballerina Programs

> When writing large-scale applications with complex logic, it is quite possible to have syntax, semantic,

Reviewer: `it is quite possible to have syntax` - this sounds like it is a good thing to have syntax, semantic, or runtime issues in your code. Shall we reword this? @praneesha

Reviewer: added temporary commit suggestion.
Will improve this from another PR

> When writing large-scale applications with complex logic, it is quite possible to have syntax, semantic,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When writing large-scale applications with complex logic, you may encounter syntax, semantic,
```

Author: +1

Author: added with [Address the latest review suggestions](https://github.com/wso2/docs-ballerina-visual-studio-code-plugin/pull/20/commits/71d66faeecce06a07d7eccec8edf1b3c3eb42ffb)

or runtime issues in your code. The Ballerina compiler comes in handy when detecting syntax and semantic issues.

> However, it is impossible for a compiler to detect runtime errors like logical errors, because they occur during the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, it is impossible for a compiler to detect runtime errors like logical errors because they occur during the
```

program execution after a successful compilation. This is where the dedicated debugging tooling support becomes important.

> Currently, we provide a feature-rich debugging experience for troubleshooting Ballerina applications

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, a feature-rich debugging experience for troubleshooting Ballerina applications
```

> via the <a href="https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=WSO2.Ballerina" target="_blank">Ballerina Visual Studio Code extension</a>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is provided via the <a href="https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=WSO2.Ballerina" target="_blank">Ballerina Visual Studio Code extension</a>.
```

## Start a debug session

> The Ballerina extension provides multiple options to debug Ballerina applications, and the most convenient way will be using the context-aware debug codelens support.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Ballerina extension provides multiple options to debug Ballerina applications and the most convenient way will be using the context-aware debug CodeLens support.
```

> However, if you require launching debug sessions with additional configurations (i.e., program arguments, environment variables), you can use `launch.json` configurations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, if you require launching debug sessions with additional configurations (i.e., program arguments, environment variables), you can use the `launch.json` configurations.
```

> (For more information, see [Start a debug session with configurations](#start-a-debug-session-with-configurations)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Info:** For more information, see [Start a debug session with configurations](#start-a-debug-session-with-configurations)).
```

> ### Start a program debug session

Reviewer: IMO, we need a short explanation about `program`, `test`, and `remote` debugging.

See this example - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/debugger/remote-debugging?view=vs-2022

@praneesha

Reviewer: Will fix this from another PR.

Follow the steps below to start a quick debug session using CodeLens.

> 1. Open the folder which includes the Ballerina program you want to debug, and open the source file in the editor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Open the folder, which includes the Ballerina program you want to debug and open the source file in the editor.
```

2. Add the debug points you require by clicking in front of the line numbers of the file you want to debug.

3. Click the `Debug` CodeLens, which will appear just above the `main()` method.

![Start_Main Quick Debug Session](/img/start-quick-main-debug-session.gif)

<br/>

### Start a test debug session

> The Ballerina test functions can also be debugged using the codelens. The `debug` codelens will automatically appear on top of each Ballerina test function,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Ballerina test functions can also be debugged using CodeLens. The `debug` CodeLens will automatically appear on top of each Ballerina test function
```

> and you are able to execute/debug only the selected test case by clicking on the corresponding codelens as shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and you are able to execute/debug only the selected test case by clicking on the corresponding CodeLens as shown below.
```

![Start_Test Quick Debug Session](/img/start-quick-test-debug-session.gif)

<br/>

### Start a debug session with configurations

Follow the steps below to start a debug session with configurations. All the configurations need to be added in the `launch.json` file.

> 1. Open the folder, which includes the Ballerina program you want to debug, and select the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Open the folder, which includes the Ballerina program you want to debug and select the file.
```

2. Press the **Control + Shift + D** keys (for Mac: **Command + Shift +D**) to launch the Debugger view.

3. Click **create a launch.json** file and then select **Ballerina Debug** as the **Environment**.

>    You view the opened `launch.json` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You can view the opened `launch.json` file.
```

Author: added with [Address the latest review suggestions](https://github.com/wso2/docs-ballerina-visual-studio-code-plugin/pull/20/commits/71d66faeecce06a07d7eccec8edf1b3c3eb42ffb)

4. Add/edit the relevant configurations for debugging in the `launch.json` file.

5. Add the debug points you require by clicking in front of the line numbers of the file you want to debug.

![Start Debug Session](/img/start-debug-session.gif)

> Then, you can start a program, test, or remote debug session as shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, you can start a program, test, or perform a remote debug session as shown below.
```

Author: @praneesha is it necessary to emphasise the only remote debugging mode out of the three options, as you've suggested in here? @nilminiwso2 WDYT?

Reviewer: I believe what we are trying to say here is the `You can start a program debug session, test debug session, and a remote debug session as shown below`.

Therefore, let's go with something like the following?
This will become more clearer once we have explained program, test, and remote debugging a bit more. Will send a separate PR for that.

```
Then, you can start a session for **program**, **test**, or **remote** debugging.
```

>**Info:** If you launch the debug session through VS Code, the working directory will be the Ballerina package root. However, you can use remote debugging for alternative working directories.

#### Start a program debug session with configurations

Follow the steps below to start a program debug session.

1. Select **Ballerina Debug** from the drop-down available in the upper left corner to start a program debugging session.

2. Click the **Start Debugging** icon on the upper left corner to start debugging.

   You view the output in the **DEBUG CONSOLE**.

   ![Program Debug](/img/program-debug.gif)

<br/>

#### Start a test debug session with configurations

Follow the steps below to start a test debug session.

> 1. Select **Ballerina Test** from the drop-down available in the upper left corner to start a test debugging session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Select **Ballerina Test** from the drop-down menu available in the upper-left corner to start a test debugging session.
```

> 2. Click the **Start Debugging** icon on the upper left corner to start debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Click the **Start Debugging** icon in the upper-left corner to start debugging.
```

>    You view the output in the **DEBUG CONSOLE**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You can view the output in the **DEBUG CONSOLE**.
```

   ![Test Debug](/img/test-debug.gif)

<br/>

### Start a remote debug session

Follow the steps below to start a remote debug session.

1. Create the `launch.json` configuration file if it is not created already. For instructions on creating the `launch.json` file, see [Start a debug session with configurations](#start-a-debug-session-with-configurations).

2. Open the `launch.json` file and configure the `debuggeeHost` and `debuggeePort` attributes under the `Ballerina Remote` configurations section accordingly.

3. After setting the remote debug configurations, select **Ballerina Remote** from the drop-down available in the upper left corner to start a remote debugging session.

> 4. Open the Terminal and execute the Ballerina command, which you want to debug out of the supported remote debugging commands below.

Reviewer: This sentence seems to be out of place.
It implies that we are `debugging a Ballerina command`. Is that correct? 

Is this what we are trying to say?

```
Open a terminal and execute the debug command that is relevant to each issue as explained below.
```

Reviewer: Added commit suggestion

> 4. Open the Terminal and execute the Ballerina command, which you want to debug out of the supported remote debugging commands below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Open a terminal and execute the debug command that is relevant to each issue as explained below.
```

Author: @nilminiwso2 mentioning as `relevant to each issue` might not make sense, since the mentioned cases are more like use cases. 

Shall we say `Open a terminal and execute the one of the below debug commands that is relevant to your requirement`?

Reviewer: Ack. `one of the below debug commands that is relevant to your requirement` may be a bit ambiguous. 

To fix that hiccup, how about just this. The colon at the end continues the sentence.  

`Open a terminal and execute the debug command that is relevant to your requirement:`

Author: yeah this makes more sense. +1 for the latest suggestion

Author: added with [Address the latest review suggestions](https://github.com/wso2/docs-ballerina-visual-studio-code-plugin/pull/20/commits/71d66faeecce06a07d7eccec8edf1b3c3eb42ffb)

    - Debugging a Ballerina package or a single file:

    ```
    bal run --debug <DEBUGGEE_PORT> <BAL_FILE_PATH/PACKAGE_PATH>
    ```

>     - Debugging Ballerina executable JAR:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Debugging a Ballerina executable JAR:
```

    ``` 
    bal run --debug <DEBUGGEE_PORT> <EXECUTABLE_JAR_FILE_PATH>
    ```

    - Debugging Ballerina tests:

    ```
    bal test --debug <DEBUGGEE_PORT> <PACKAGE_PATH>
    ```

   The terminal will show the following log:

    ```
    Listening for transport dt_socket at address: 5005
    ```

> 5. Click the **Start Debugging** icon on the upper left corner to start debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Click the **Start Debugging** icon on the upper-left corner to start debugging.
```

>    You view the output in the **DEBUG CONSOLE**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You can view the output in the **DEBUG CONSOLE** as shown below.
```

   ![Remote Debug](/img/remote-debug.gif)

<br/>

## Use debug configurations

The Ballerina debugger supports various debug configuration options via the `launch.json` file.

> >**Info:** You can either add configurations to the existing `launch.json` file (which is located in your workspace root under the `.vscode` directory), or you can generate the `launch.json` configurations file with default values by,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Info:** You can either add the configurations to the existing `launch.json` file, which is located in your workspace root under the `.vscode` directory) or follow the steps below to generate the `launch.json` configurations file with the default values.
```

> >**Info:** You can either add the configurations to the existing `launch.json` file, which is located in your workspace root under the `.vscode` directory) or follow the steps below to generate the `launch.json` configurations file with the default values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Info:** You can either add the configurations to the existing `launch.json` file, which is located in your workspace root under the `.vscode` directory or follow the steps below to generate the `launch.json` configurations file with the default values.
```

1. Click the **Run and Debug** icon in the left menu or press the **Control + Shift + D** keys to launch the Debugger view (for Mac - **Command + Shift +D**).

> 2. Click on **create a launch.json file** and then select **Ballerina Debug**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Click **create a launch.json file** and select **Ballerina Debug**.
```

![Run And Debug](/img/run-and-debug.png)

<br/>

![Ballerina Debug](/img/ballerina-debug.png)

<br/>

> Here are the default configurations generated for the Ballerina debugging:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The below are the default configurations generated for the Ballerina debugging:
```

> The below are the default configurations generated for the Ballerina debugging:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given below are the default configurations generated for debugging Ballerina:
```

![Debug Configurations](/img/debug-configurations.png)

<br/>

### Ballerina `launch.json` attributes

> The auto-generated `launch.json` file consists of three main configurations named `Ballerina Debug`, `Ballerina Test` and `Ballerina Remote`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The auto-generated `launch.json` file consists of three main configurations named `Ballerina Debug`, `Ballerina Test`, and `Ballerina Remote`.
```

Each configuration supports a different set of attributes, which will be provided via IntelliSense completion suggestions.

The following attributes are mandatory for all configurations.

> - `name` - The reader-friendly name to appear in the Debug launch configuration dropdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `name` - The reader-friendly name to appear in the Debug launch configuration drop-down menu.
```

- `type` - The type of debugger to use for this launch configuration. The attribute value must be kept as `ballerina` for all Ballerina debugging configuration types.

> - `request` - The request type of this launch configuration. Currently, launch and attach are supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `request` - The request type of this launch configuration. Currently, `launch` and `attach` are supported.
```

- `debugTests` - Indicates whether to debug the tests for the given script.

The following attributes are supported for all Ballerina `attach` configurations.

- `debuggeeHost` - Host address of the remote process to be attached (if not specified, the default value will be the localhost(`127.0.0.1`)).
- `debuggeePort` - Port number of the remote process to be attached.

## Use the debugging features

The following debugging features are currently supported by the Ballerina VScode extension.

- Launch/Attach
- Breakpoints
    - Conditional Breakpoints
    - Logpoints
- Pause & Continue
- Step In/Out/Over
- Ballerina Strand and Stacktrace view
- Variable view
- Variable/Expression Watch Window
- Expression Evaluation

### Conditional breakpoints

The Ballerina debugger provides the ability of setting Ballerina expression-based conditions for regular breakpoints.
The debugger will suspend at the breakpoint whenever the expression evaluates to true.

![Debugger Conditional Breakpoints](/img/debugger-conditional-breakpoints.gif)

<br/>

### Logpoints

> Logpoints are another variant of breakpoints, which do not "break" the program execution but instead log a message to the console. Logpoints are especially useful for injecting logging while debugging production servers that cannot be paused or stopped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Logpoints are another variant of breakpoints, which do not "break" the program execution and instead, log a message to the console. Logpoints are especially useful for injecting logging while debugging production servers that cannot be paused or stopped.
```

Logpoints can also be enabled/disabled and can be controlled by conditions similar to regular breakpoints.

![Debugger Logpoints](/img/debugger-logpoints.gif)

Log messages can either be plain texts or string templates, which can contain expressions to be evaluated within the `${}` syntax.

![Debugger String Temaplate Logpoints](/img/debugger-logpoints-template.gif)

<br/>

### Pause and continue

> Any running Ballerina programs can be suspended immediately at the current execution line of the program, using the `pause` command in VSCode as shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any running Ballerina programs can be suspended immediately at the current execution line of the program using the `pause` command in VS Code as shown below.
```

With this feature, you are able to suspend (and resume) the remote VM resulting in a debug hit at the current execution line of the program.

![Debugger Pause/Resume Commands](/img/debugger-pause-resume-commands.gif)

> This feature will be useful in contexts where the program seems to be hanged due to blocking operations/infinite loops, and when you want to know the exact line that the program is waiting on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This feature will be useful in contexts where the program seems to be hanged due to blocking operations/infinite loops and when you want to know the exact line that the program is waiting on.
```

### Expression evaluation

> Ballerina expression evaluator allows evaluating Ballerina variables and expressions at runtime allowing them to be viewed when the IDE is in the break mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ballerina expression evaluator allows evaluating Ballerina variables and expressions at runtime by allowing them to be viewed when the IDE is in the break mode.
```

The Ballerina VSCode debugger lets you evaluate expressions in the ways below.

#### Use the debug console

![Debugger Evaluation Console](/img/debugger-evaluation-console.gif)

#### Use the watch window

![Debugger Watch Window](/img/debugger-watch-window.gif)

<br/>

> >**Info:** For more information on VSCode debugging features, go to <a href="https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging" target="_blank">VS Code documentation</a>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Info:** For more information on the VS Code debugging features, go to <a href="https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging" target="_blank">VS Code documentation</a>.
```
